Abstract
 This project assesses whether or not a player understands the ethical repercussions of their
 actions in games either through play or narrative. It also investigates how the player
 understands the game world and the characters within on a moral level. Specifically, this is
 achieved by setting up moral dilemmas with opaque ethical frameworks within a game
 environment. The product that delivers this test environment is a short game which
 investigates how narrative can set up such ethical frameworks. The results of the play testing
 indicate that players do switch their tactics from ethical to strategic or from strategic to
 ethical between each play through in order to win the game. This highlights that the test
 subjects were aware of the consequences of their actions and adjusted their play style
 accordingly.
 iii
 Contents
 Declaration .................................................................................................................................. i
 Acknowledgements.................................................................................................................... ii
 Abstract ..................................................................................................................................... iii
 Contents .................................................................................................................................... iv
 List of Figures .......................................................................................................................... viii
 List of Tables ............................................................................................................................. ix
 iv
 v
 7.3.3 Distributions of Choice Path and Moral/Practical and Ethical/Strategic Questions
 7.3.5 Distributions of Choice Path and Moral/Practical and Ethical/Strategic Questions
 vi
 vii
 List of Figures
 viii
 List of Tables
 ix
 1 Introduction
 The main aim of the project is to see if players understand the ethical repercussions of their
 actions in games through play and narrative. This will be investigated by making a game which
 has a story and uses specific techniques such as the verfremdungseffekt (Dunne 2014) to test
 player ethics and strategy.
 The topic was chosen due to an interest in the interactivity of computer games which use
 both play and narrative to allow the player to make decisions which is different from many
 other types of media such as film. As computer games are an interactive medium they allow
 players to interact with and make decisions for the characters in a game. The project was
 chosen due to an interest in the way computer games handle this player interaction with the
 game subject matter. A player can choose to do a certain action in a game and then they are
 presented with the consequences. The type of choices presented and their consequences can
 help the player understand that they must act ethically in the game in order to progress or
 win.
 Narrative techniques such as the verfremdungseffekt or the alienation effect (Dunne 2014)
 will be investigated in a gaming context to see if they can be used to make the player
 understand the consequences of their actions in a computer game. Different aspects of
 computer games will be discussed with relation to the alienation effect to investigate the
 ethical frameworks of computer games, the players reality and whether a player can bring
 their own moral framework to a computer game.
 The product created to test the realisation of player ethics through play and narrative is a
 computer game. To create this, the project with focus on moral and ethical frameworks in
 games and other media. The game created will not be about winning or losing but about the
 choices the player has to make, their awareness of the consequences and whether or not
 their play style changes as a reaction to these consequences. How the player views the morals
 and ethics of the game and whether they play from a moral or ethical standpoint during the
 game is very important. The main aim of the project is to investigate the most effective way
 to make a player realise the ethical implications of their actions in games.
 The first part of the project will include a literature review which will look at examples of video
 games and will look at the alienation effect and its use in games. The literature review will
 focus on moral and ethical frameworks and how people justify their actions. Specific types of
 alienation in games has been reviewed and how ethics and alienation combine and affect
 each other. Ethics in products such as computer games has also been researched.
 Following the literature review is a section on the product requirements supporting the
 product specifications, after which the game design is presented. How the game was
 developed is given in the implementation section, followed by how the game was tested prior
 to release. The play testing is then discussed with the presentation of the questionnaire
 results. After the play testing section, the results will be evaluated to determine whether or
 not the objective was achieved. Finally, the conclusions and further work are presented.
 The product created to test the hypothesis is an RPG of interactive fiction. While the research
 was quite intensive, the game product was less programming intensive and more focussed on
 the design of the product rather than the construction of the game. The design of the game
 takes into account factors such as creating multiple choices and what these choices are. The
 main limitations of the product are the lack of combat and the size of the area to be explored.
 The tool used was RPG Maker MV (ENTERBRAIN INCORPORATED 2015).
 2 Literature Review
 The majority of games that are aimed at the core gamer demographic have many differences
 from one another, namely genre, setting, character, mechanics, etc. With the differences
 however, games have a great deal in common; one aspect being the disconnect between the
 real world and the game world.
 With the player in the game doing actions that in the real world would be considered
 unethical, the player is generally never made to think about their actions in the game and
 instead meant to think about the characters they are killing as faceless enemies designed to
 be mowed down by the player in the thousands. Which of course the enemies are designed
 for, but this design does not generally mesh with the players understanding of the real world.
 This raises questions such as, can the designer intentionally make the player realise the effects
 of their actions, and if so what is the most effective way from a design perspective of doing
 so? The project will attempt to answer these questions.
 2.1 Ethical Systems
 Ethics can be defined as what the game wants the player to do ethically and what the player's
 ethics are in general. For example, Zagal gives a selection of ethical perspectives in games,
 which is mostly about how a game can be viewed ethically as its own artefact (Zagal 2009).
 Zagal lists perspectives such as;
  Value of artefact; is it ethical for this game to exist? Should a particular game have
 been created in the first place?
  Business ethics; how do you create, produce, market and sell games ethically?
  Ethics of play; what does it mean to play a game ethically?
  Framework; what in-game actions are defined as good by the game?
 This dissertation focuses on player ethics and ethical frameworks.
 Playing Ethically
 What does it mean to play a game ethically? Zagal asks (Zagal 2009):
 "Does the act of playing a game inherently trivialise the issues
 it tackles and thus render any game about a serious topic
 inherently unethical? We think not."
 Do players take their decisions seriously even though they are playing a game? There is some
 catharsis in going around shooting everyone because the player knows it is only a game. It is
 not something a person would do in real life because the player knows the difference
 between fantasy and reality.
 This project investigates whether a player applies their own ethical framework to play
 ethically when the game environment presents moral dilemmas. To test this the product must
 provide moral dilemmas. The dilemmas should not be too complex so they can be analysed
 statistically. In order to ensure that the players choice is based on their own ethics, the game
 must not incentivise the player to make a particular decision.
 Ethical Frameworks
 How does a game generally define what is a good response and what is a bad response?
 Sometimes it is by a points or karma system which defines the ethical framework of the game
 such as in Fallout 3 (Bethesda Game Studios 2008). An ethical framework could be defined as
 "if you do X action you would be rewarded by Y amount of points", it is a reward system
 based on karma and because your karma is high, people will give you free stuff.
 In Ultima IV (Garriott 1985) however, the designer imposes their own moral code and their
 own rule system on the player. The player is forced to alter their morals to that framework
 and to play that way to win the game. In order to isolate whether or not the player
 understands the ethical repercussions of their actions one wants to make sure that the moral
 framework is of the player's own devise, of their own nature, not from a game's contextual
 play.
 If you remove all rewards, you remove objectivity and thus it is an entirely subjective choice
 which means you have to remove the framework to get to the player's ethics. This project will
 try to make the player reflect and make ethical decisions based on the information they are
 given in the game, not a reward system.
 2.1.2.1 Opaque Ethical Frameworks
 Opaque ethical frameworks intentionally obscure the morally correct thing to do.
 Ethical frameworks that are opaque to their players risk becoming
 perceived as morally irrelevant. Ethical frameworks that are
 inconsistent face a greater risk of: confusing the player. (Zagal 2009).
 In order to assess if players understand the repercussions of their actions a simple test is
 required. At the risk of confusing the player as noted by Zagal, the ethical framework for this
 product will be opaque to the player. This is to ensure the only ethical framework is that of
 the players. This should assist in discovering if the players bring their own sense of morality
 from reality to the game by removing ethical variables. Without a points system and by
 relying on the player to fill in the gaps and use their own ethical standpoint, the game runs
 the risk of becoming more like moral test than a game. To ensure it remains a game, the
 product must be entertaining, a role-playing game (RPG) would satisfy this criterion.
 Emotional Involvement
 In order to test the source of player ethics the product should ensure that the player is
 emotionally engaged. Pohl thinks there are two different ways a game can give emotional
 involvement to the player (Pohl 2008).
 Instantaneous and spontaneous; we play because we want to win, such as arcade
 games and games without a large amount of story line.
 Narrative framing; we continue to play because we identify with and care about the
 story, generally RPGs and narrative driven action games.
 A computer based role-playing game without mechanics such as battle systems will not
 spontaneously or instantaneously involve the player. There will be no incentive to win the
 game, instead it is about player choices. This product must rely on narrative based framing to
 emotionally involve the player.
 2.2 Moral Dilemmas
 A moral dilemma in a game is generally where you have two choices which are both mutually
 exclusive choices and they are both very important to either the character or side characters
 for the rest of the plot. It is a choice the player has to go through to achieve the rest of the
 game. Zagal states that:
 "A moral dilemma is a situation in which an agent morally ought to do A and also
 morally ought to do B but cannot do both, either because B is not just doing A or
 because some contingent feature of the world prevents doing both." (Zagal 2009)
 Mutually exclusive choices between what the player wants to do and what the player decides
 the character should do can be defined as a good choice and a more evil choice. Generally,
 they will achieve the same thing as it is mostly about how you achieve the end goal in the
 game using this choice. Games are good at creating a moral code within the player, rather
 than the player bringing a moral code to the game. The product will test if a player can bring
 a moral code to the game. It is the player who faces the moral dilemma, not the character.
 In Greenes paper on fMRI scanning it says that the brain areas identified with moral choice
 are different for when someone is emotionally invested in something (Greene et al. 2001).
 Certain areas of the brain were significantly more active in the moral-personal condition than
 in the moral-impersonal and the non-moral conditions" (Greene et al. 2001). This essentially
 means that the brain reacts differently and thinks differently in moral decisions, but reactions
 also depend on how closely related the person is to that decision or how important that
 decision is in reality. So it could also be argued that in computer games most decisions, unless
 you made the player heavily emotionally invested in the characters, are morally impersonal
 decisions which are thus essentially strategic decisions.
 In Moral Dilemmas and Moral Rules the authors say that Joshua Greene proposes that
 response in footbridge-style cases is generated by that fact that these actions are personal
 and such actions generate greater emotional engagement than impersonal actions (Nichols
 & Mallon 2006). Essentially what they are saying in the work is that if the person is engaged,
 they care about these people, and are thus less likely to do a personal action than an
 impersonal action. The actions in the game product will be impersonal as the player only has
 to click a button and read a cutscene text telling them about the consequences. Although the
 player will be emotionally involved due to the narrative, their moral judgement will not be
 impaired by emotions evoked by personal actions.
 In order to test if the player uses his or her own ethical code, the player should have enough
 information to make an intelligent guess of what may or may not happen afterwards. The
 player should realise that these decisions are not that simple. This is to point out that moral
 dilemmas are not straightforward or clear cut.
 Narrative Framework
 The narrative framework helps players understand the environment in which they are making
 their choices. It makes the players decisions make sense within the setting, thus keeping
 them immersed. It also gives a more logical reason for why the character is making these
 choices instead of being arbitrary decisions. To draw people in to the narrative a Star Wars
 format could be followed for the product using an introduction to what is going on, bringing
 the player directly into the story. Players should not be told a lot about the world, they should
 know they have an objective and they should also meet all the side characters quickly in the
 plot.
 The product should be set in a constructed world that is intriguing. It should not have a
 historical backdrop as this may risk historical inaccuracies or may affect the players choices
 due to preconceived biases and ideologies. It also allows greater freedom regarding what the
 player can do and more creative freedom in the design.
 Player Morals with Respect to Game Design
 The players morals and ethics can be affected by five aspects of the game that are within the
 designers control; the mechanics of the game, technology, narrative tone, aesthetic and art
 style.
 2.2.2.1 The Mechanics of the Game
 The mechanics are inherent rules in the game which make the game function and make it
 playable. For example, movement, interacting with characters and combat are mechanics.
 However, very early games did not have enough technology to allow mechanics. An example
 of this would be the Magnavox Odyssey, the first console, which didn't have any programmedin rules or sets of rules in the console or the games (Magnavox 1972). There wasn't enough
 ram and computer power to do that. Instead the designers of the Magnavox Odyssey used
 plastic overlays that you would put onto your screen and they came with a rule book which
 allowed the players to follow the rules, but the player could choose not to because the
 controls of the Magnavox are an X and Y controller, controlled by sliders. The game relied
 essentially on players being good sportsmen and not cheating on the game.
 Magnavox did not have enough technology to enable mechanics, but later consoles were able
 to restrict what the player could do or reward players for doing things that in the real world
 are considered ethically unsound. For example in Burnout (Criterion Games 2001) crashing
 into peoples cars is acceptable because it is just a game. Mechanics is what the game allows
 the player to do. The designer permits certain things and restricts the player from other
 things. For example, in Grand Theft Auto (Rockstar North 1997), going around and shooting
 people with guns, is a combat mechanic. The game does not restrict you from killing anyone,
 however you are technically punished for shooting people by some aggressive police in the
 form of non-player characters (NPCs) that will try and kill you.
 The rules and mechanics are important because otherwise, if the player knows they can do
 something, then they will most likely do it. In open world games the player will do things
 which the designer was not intending for the player to do, such as accessing parts of the game
 that were not supposed to be accessible until later in the game. Players are able to use glitches
 and bugs to get to places the designer was not expecting them to go to. If you allow the player
 to do things, they will go and do those things and if there is not a punishment then they will
 definitely do those things.
 The designer can also encourage the player against doing certain things, for example in the
 game Fallout 2 (Black Isle Studios 1998), the player will gain certain traits if the players
 character carries out certain actions. For example, if the player puts someone into slavery,
 the players character will be branded as a slaver which means certain characters will react to
 you differently and be more hostile to you, also you'll probably get worse money in certain
 places. Then you get other brands such as grave robber which does a similar thing, but that's
 punishing the player for specifically using a shovel to rob people's graves. There is also child
 killer, if you kill one of the many children in the game everyone in the town you are in turns
 hostile towards you. As a child murderer, the player will also encounter random battles with
 bounty hunters because of their previous actions.
 These are reputations in which the player is penalised for doing specific actions or rewarded
 for doing certain other actions. For being a child killer you will encounter negative random
 encounters more often. Grave digger means you will get negative karma and for being a slaver
 you'll be restricted from doing certain quests because specific factions hate you. This is the
 way the designers discourage the player from making certain immoral and unethical
 decisions, but it also opens the game up to other paths. For example, if you are a slaver it
 opens up a different quest line than if you became a ranger who was fighting the slavers in
 this game.
 Another example is the Assassin's Creed (Ubisoft 2007) series where, if you kill too many
 civilians, the game will drop you out of the game and restart you saying you have killed too
 many civilians and that's not something the character would do. Interestingly the only one in
 the series which doesn't do that is Assassin's Creed Rogue (Ubisoft Sofia 2014), where you are
 playing a different faction in the universe than the assassin's faction. This means you can go
 around and murder people because the faction you are part of does not care if you murder
 people. This is also an example of the game showing the player the different ethical
 perspectives of different factions in the game. In other factions you can't do a certain action,
 but if you are in this particular faction you can.
 The product should limit the mechanics to character movement and character interaction in
 order to force the player to focus on the moral dilemmas presented rather than engage in
 combat, experience or loot (Game Makers Toolkit 2016).
 2.2.2.2 Technology
 Technology is important to ethics in that it restricts the game from achieving certain things.
 Does the technology allow the players character to move in 3D? Does it allow photorealistic
 representation of characters? An example of this would be Oblivion (Bethesda Game Studios
 2006). There are only a two voice actors for all the elf races (wood elf, dark elf and high elf)
 which breaks the player out of the environment. This is mostly related to the character design
 and the restrictions of the game engine used to make the game, which was the Gamebryo
 engine (Gamebase Co. & Gamebase USA 1991). Oblivion also tries to have a photorealistic
 aesthetic style as in Figure 2-1. However, the characters look very plastic and strange which
 unnerved people because the characters look somewhat realistic but not realistic enough so
 they enter the uncanny valley (Wikipedia 2016e). This was not a problem with aesthetics or
 art design, it was a problem with technology as the technology was not available at the time
 to make them more realistic.
 Figure 2-1: Screenshot from The Elder Scrolls IV: Oblivion
 [Taken from (CBS Interactive 2015)]
 It was also strange because of how you interacted with the characters. You zoomed in on their
 face so you had a talking head with quite realistic lip movement which was very unnerving.
 This alienates the player from the characters, thus the player is less able to sympathise with
 the characters. The product should not try to obtain photo realism as the play testers should
 be sufficiently alienated so that they are not immersed in the game and thus use their own
 moral and ethical frameworks when playing the game.
 2.2.2.3 Narrative Tone
 The narrative tone of the game world also affects the players ethics. In Grand Theft Auto IV
 (Rockstar North 2008) for example, the tone of the world is very dark and all about the cycle
 of criminality. If the tone is very dark and depressing players often react more strongly to
 characters, either being more sympathetic to their plight or apathetic at the other end of the
 spectrum, if the characters actions seem futile. These extremes of player reactions can
 depend a great deal on how certain characters respond to their particular setting.
 The narrative tone of the product should not be too dark as this would make the player feel
 hopeless and reduce their feeling of agency. As a consequence, they may feel their choices
 are irrelevant and thus make arbitrary decisions regardless of their morality. The product
 should also not be too light-hearted in narrative tone as the player would then not take
 decisions seriously and assume that there are no serious consequences to their choices. A
 neutral tone is required for realistic decision making.
 2.2.2.4 Aesthetic and Art Style
 Aesthetic and art style can also have an impact on player ethics. It is a widely held notion that
 cute animals produce positive emotions in the vast majority of people. Therefore, a person is
 less likely to harm something cute, such as a giant panda, than something ugly, like a
 cockroach. A supporting fact is that endangered animals that are cute receive more monetary
 and ethical support than ugly creatures. With this is mind, the product should have a basic
 character design and not try to achieve a specific art style. The players moral choices may be
 influenced if the characters are at either extreme of cuteness or ugliness.
 The Legend of Zelda (Nintendo 1986) series has differing aesthetics in each game, where some
 games have very bright colourful aesthetics like The Legend of Zelda: The Wind Waker
 (Nintendo EAD 2002) and the story is very light in comparison to other games in the series.
 While the back story of The Wind Waker (Nintendo EAD 2002) is quite dark, due to the main
 villain being resurrected and trying to take over the world, the majority of the story is quite
 light and all about the adventures of Link and a talking boat. The game that came after this
 which is Twilight Princess (Nintendo EAD 2006), deals with issues such as characters having
 destructive memories and schizophrenia. It has a much deeper and darker subject matter. It
 could be argued that because Wind Waker (Nintendo EAD 2002) had a light-hearted subject
 matter, the aesthetic was very light in tone to match this. On the other hand, Twilight Princess
 (Nintendo EAD 2006) had a more adult subject matter and a darker aesthetic. The aesthetic
 appears to echo the subject matter or vice versa.
 This technically is not always the case as there are several games which have a very cutesy
 aesthetic, but a dark subject matter such as Conkers Bad Fur Day (Rare 2001). The games
 aesthetic and style is a 3D platformer which makes a person expect the game to be very child
 friendly or aimed at a younger demographic. However the game opens with a section
 referencing A Clockwork Orange (Kubrick 1971) and there is a lot of sex and swearing and lots
 of adult jokes in the game. So it could be argued that the aesthetic can be used to disarm the
 player from understanding what the tone of the game will be and making them assume it will
 be something else.
 The aesthetic for the product should not create a particular tone for the game as this may
 steer the player in a certain direction and make them think that the designer wants the player
 to follow a certain path or play style. A neutral aesthetic tone would allow the player to
 remain unbiased in this respect.
 2.3 Using Choices to Setup Moral Dilemmas
 There are many types of choices in games which can generally be summed up in two
 categories; mechanical choices and narrative choices. The choices given in the product will be
 narrative choices as this will allow the player to bring their own ethical framework to the
 game. Mechanical choices inflict a rule and ethics system defined by the game and thus would
 encourage players to follow a certain predetermined path.
 Narrative choices in the simplest form are binary. Binary choices could represent the
 extremes of good versus bad, but they could also be at other extremes such as pragmatist
 versus idealist. Binary choices are easy to control from a design perspective and make the
 right choice more obvious to the player as the options are often opposite. However, binary
 choices feel somewhat artificial as in reality one often has to choose between choices that
 exist on a continuous spectrum of grey rather than the black and white of absolutes.
 An example of a pragmatist versus idealist choice system would be in Mass Effect (BioWare
 2007) with its Paragon and Renegade karma paths. Which means each choice has a Paragon
 choice and a Renegade choice. In Mass Effect (BioWare 2007) Paragon is defined by being
 very idealistic, very nice and focussed on helping everyone get the job done in the nicest
 manner possible. Renegade is about being more of a pragmatist and getting stuff done in a
 quick and efficient way as possible and not really caring who gets in the way. The objective
 for both characters is the same, its really about how the player decides what to do.
 Having three choices at each level would make the event of choosing more realistic as the
 options are not at extremes. Dungeons and Dragons (Gygax & Arneson 1974) uses a 3x3 table
 of lawful, neutral, chaotic, and good, neutral, evil to define character traits and character
 alignments. This is a template for how a character will interact with other characters and
 reminds the player how their character acts. Lawful is upheld by a very strict code, whether
 that is good or bad. Neutral is self-explanatory and the character rarely gets involved with the
 main events of the game. Chaotic evil is embodied by the Joker character in Batman (Nolan
 2008) for example, and chaotic good is a Robin Hood-type character or a rebel; someone who
 doesn't need the law to do what they think is right.
 Lawful good
 Neutral good
 Chaotic good
 Lawful neutral
 (True) neutral
 Chaotic neutral
 Lawful evil
 Neutral evil
 Chaotic evil
 Table 1: Character alignments from Dungeons and Dragons
 [Taken from Alignments (Wikipedia 2016a)]
 Although the options in Table 1 were designed for character alignments, it is a useful lens
 through which to analyse the variety of moral standpoints and helpful when mapping out
 decision trees. The product will be loosely based on this table when a multiple choice question
 is presented.
 Four choices should not be given in the product as the fourth choice is often too vague and
 not obvious. With three choices you can clearly have two extremes and a middle option.
 When a fourth choice is introduced the choice options become too open-ended as the fourth
 choice can be anything. Four choices would also make the product harder to design as the
 decision tree would become too broad and convoluted.
 2.4 Alienation
 The alienation effect or verfremdungseffekt was created by Bertolt Brecht in the 1930s in the
 epic parable play Die Rundkpfe und die Spitzkpfe; round heads and pointy heads (Brows
 Held High 2014). The play is a satirical anti-Nazi parable about a country called Yahoo in which
 the rulers maintain their control by setting the people with rounded heads against those with
 pointed heads (Wikipedia 2016d). It is a reference to how the Nazis used race relations in the
 1930s to control Germany. The alienation effect is the effect of making the player, audience
 or whoever is ingesting a specific piece of media no longer immersed. It is intentionally trying
 to shatter a persons immersion to make them think about the characters actions and what
 is actually happening.
 For example, the film Cloud Atlas (Tykwer et al. 2012) used a style of acting in which all the
 actors played multiple roles in different stories. It can be argued to have been done to make
 the audience think about how two particular actors always get together, thus it is a
 reincarnation soul-motif using specific repeating themes. The point of having an actor play
 multiple roles is so that the audience can draw parallels between the characters because they
 are being played by the same actor so there is a connection. It makes the audience actually
 think about what is going on because they are no longer immersed in the experience, they
 have realised the artificiality of the performance. An example of this in art would be the
 illusion of imagery as in The Treachery of Images (Magritte 1928) which demonstrates that a
 painting of a pipe is not actually a pipe.
 Alienation in Games
 In gaming, the alienation or distancing effect provides the player with the opportunity to think
 about events that have happened and discover that certain things are connected. It is
 deliberate and is what the designer or writer intended. The alienation effect returns the
 player from the characters perspective back to their own reality where they are a person
 playing a game. It makes the player think about events in the game from a perspective outside
 of the game rather than from inside. This shifts their ethical standpoint from that of the
 games reality to that of the real world which overrides the game. When you are immersed
 you do not consider real world effects.
 In many games the player is immersed in the game world and setting, they are thinking about
 their actions possibly from the characters standpoint rather than a players standpoint. The
 alienation effect is meant to draw the player out and make them realise that they are playing
 a computer game and their actions would be incomprehensible to themselves in the real
 world. This is to make them realise afterwards that they are a terrible person for doing these
 actions in the game because they were completely willing to do them.
 Flow is an important part of immersion, because if there is a steady flow to the game that
 feels natural to the player they are more likely to become immersed. Alienation makes the
 player stop enjoying the experience in a very frontal, imagery and impulse type of way and
 instead makes them actually think about what is going on. It makes the player think about
 their actions rather than just going with the flow. It is meant to break the flow and make the
 player stop and consider what is going on in the game and what the game is trying to tell
 them.
 Alienation helps the mind draw parallels to multiple paths and points out the artificiality of
 the game. The alienation effect is one of the better ways to make the player think about the
 moral consequences of their actions as it makes them more thoughtful and introspective.
 Alienation in games can be achieved in a variety of ways as discussed below.
 Aesthetic alienation
 Aesthetic alienation is the purposeful use of the art design or narrative to alienate the player
 rather than using the systems in the game. An example of this is Spec Ops: The Line (Yager
 Development 2012) which alienates the player using aesthetic alienation in a number of ways;
 the third person perspective, repeated sections and the players character commenting that
 they have done this section already. This can be argued as lazy design, but this is unlikely since
 the design team obviously spent a long time focussing on different character interactions
 during the repeated scenes.
 2.4.2.1 Art Design
 The aesthetic or art direction of the game can be used in several ways to alienate the player.
 For example, the artist choosing a drastic change in colour palate from say a realistic colour
 scheme to a more other worldly colour palette, or changing the shading of the game. In Saints
 Row 4 (Volition 2013) for example, the game takes place in a simulation. There is lots of
 texture tearing, graphical glitches and specific effects such as when the entire scene becomes
 binary in different colours. The aesthetics try to alienate the player and try to force them into
 the conclusion that the game is giant simulation.
 2.4.2.2 Narrative
 The narrative of a game can be used to alienate the player such as in Bioshock (2K Boston &
 2K Australia 2007). Two thirds into the game, the player meets the main villain and it turns
 out that all the players actions have been a giant setup. It is all for the purpose of a worse
 villain who caused the entire conflict in the first place and the character is just his mindless
 slave doing what he says. To quote the game, a man chooses, a slave obeys (2K Boston &
 2K Australia 2007). Then the player is told by the second villain to kill him in which the player
 has no choice. The player has realised their lack of actual control and desperately tries to get
 it back again which makes up the next third of the game.
 This part of Bioshock (2K Boston & 2K Australia 2007) breaks the fourth wall as the player
 realises that all they have been doing for the entire game is what they have been told. The
 fourth wall is a term in theatre which refers to where the audience is. The actors in a play do
 not acknowledge the fact that the fourth wall is not there, they pretend there is a wall so they
 dont see the audience. When attention is drawn to the fact that the audience, or in this case
 a player, is outside of the play or game, the audience/player is no longer immersed and the
 fourth wall is broken. This device appears in all types of media from books to film to games.
 System Alienation
 In games the alienation effect can also be achieved through the use of mechanics or the
 players state in the game and how they control everything. This is referred to as system
 alienation. Dunne describes it as  the alienating effect that is brought on by games via the
 use of the system, or its files to interact with the audience..(Dunne 2014). An example of this
 is X-Com: Declassified (2K Marin 2013) which is a third person shooter where the player is
 fighting an alien invasion in the early 60s. In that game the player discovers that they are not
 controlling the character they thought they were playing for the entire game, Agent Carter
 who is a human. Instead they have been playing as an alien being that controls Agent Carter.
 Therefore, the player controls that alien rather than controlling Carter. The player chooses a
 different character later in the game and plays a level as that character. Seeing another being
 controlling the first character makes the player think about how they themselves are
 controlling the alien being, controlling a character. It makes the player think about their
 actions as a character in the game. It doesnt change how they think about current actions,
 but makes them think more about their place in reality.
 Another example of system alienation is in Metal Gear Solid (Konami Computer
 Entertainment Japan 1998) The player plays as Solid Snake and in one section is forced to
 interact with the game in a physical way. In one of the bosses you have to fight Psycho Mantis
 and the only way you can beat him is by unplugging your controller and plugging it into
 controller port 2 because the first controller port does not allow you to control the character
 properly for this section. It influences how the player controls the game, rather than affecting
 the game characters. This makes the player realise they are playing a computer game. It is a
 very strange section of the game where the developers faces are on the wall laughing
 mockingly in portraits, intentionally breaking the fourth wall. This intentional alienation is
 caused by the physical action of getting up and unplugging the controller. The immersion is
 completely broken, the player is no longer Solid Snake; they are the player who is controlling
 Solid Snake.
 Alienation and Virtual Reality (VR) Games
 VR games have only been around for a very short period of time and have only started to
 become commercially available to people now. As they have only recently come on the
 market, there are very few examples of VR games that try to break the immersion of the
 player as the entire point of the technology is to immerse the player in the environment of
 the game. One example so far is SUPERHOT (Superhot Team 2016) which involves the players
 character playing a VR game. At one point, the players character controls another character
 who is nearby the players original characters apartment. The second character has to go into
 the players original characters apartment to assault the players original character in their
 reality. When you get there, there is an array of monitors around the players original
 character and they all show the players perspective because it is a first person game, so you
 see the players original character controlling the second character on screen.
 The player is forced at this point to contemplate the different levels of reality and question
 their own role as the game player, which effectively and intentionally alienates the player
 from the game. This is an interesting part of SUPERHOT considering that the aim of VR games
 is to fully immerse the player in the game environment.,
 2.5 Ludonarrative Dissonance
 The main things a game strives for is immersion, photo realism and trying to make you believe
 the game world exists; this is a real place where real stuff happens and real lives are on the
 line. Ludonarrative dissonance or narrative disconnect is the point at which this immersion is
 unintentionally broken (Hocking 2009). Ludonarrative dissonance can be summed up in the
 game part; the rules governing what the player is allowed to do which control the games
 choices and their consequences, and the narrative part; the context surrounding what the
 player is asked to do. It is when the story of the game does not mesh with the mechanics of
 the game world.
 Ludonarrative dissonance is a consequence of game designers not taking something into
 account or designing the game in a specific way which allows things to happen that they did
 not intend to happen. In The Elder Scrolls (Bethesda Game Studios 1994) the player hears the
 same voice actors over and over again for different characters. One character will tell you to
 go and kill himself in a different city because they all have the same voice actor. This is
 unintentional, the designers did not mean for that to happen. It is just something that
 happened due to lack of preparation, or not hiring enough voice actors. Other examples of
 narrative disconnect are discussed below.
 Cutscene Incompetence
 Cutscene incompetence is where the players character is much more incompetent when the
 player is not controlling them (TV Tropes 2016a). This is shown in the Far Cry series (Crytek
 Studios 2004) when the players character is kidnapped by an enemy. The enemy is just a
 random enemy NPC which the player has probably killed hundreds of by that point in the
 game, but the player is unable to defeat them here. This is generally done to enable the player
 to have a conversation with the villain before being thrown into some kind of death trap from
 which they have to escape.
 Choice in Games
 Ludonarrative dissonance can also be the result of the writer or designers not taking into
 account the mechanics and choices of the game and how that may lead to the game not
 making sense. An example of this is Bioshock (2K Boston & 2K Australia 2007) in which players
 are given lots of freedom with regard to how they play and lots of control over their play style
 and moral choices. The main underlying theme of the story is that the player has no free will,
 the players character is being controlled by an enemy or someone off-screen telling them to
 do things. The freedom of play style conflicts with the lack of free will as described by the
 narrative, thus causing a narrative disconnect.
 Narrative Conflicts
 In Fallout 3 (Bethesda Game Studios 2008) the player is told a lot that there are not many
 humans in the capital wasteland, yet the player encounters hundreds of enemy raiders during
 the game. In other RPG games in combat, the players character can die but can be revived by
 a Phoenix Down for example (Square Enix (formerly SquareSoft) 1987). If they die in the story
 however, they are dead for good. Examples like these create a disconnect between the player
 and the game, another example of ludonarrative dissonance.
 Glitches
 Unintentional glitches in a games graphics are another example of ludonarrative dissonance
 and how it can break the players immersion. When there are glitches in the game the player
 realises they are in a game. All open world games suffer from ludonarrative dissonance in this
 sense. In Skyrim (Bethesda Game Studios 2011) for example, which is a giant open exploratory
 world which the player can explore to their hearts content, the characters can clip certain
 objects and walk through things that are supposed to be solid. In The Elder Scrolls (Bethesda
 Game Studios 1994) characters talk to the player when they are half submerged in water, or
 the players character can no longer carry any more even though they only picked up one
 bobby pin; their backpack weighs too much and they are suddenly over encumbered.
 Intentional use of Ludonarrative Dissonance
 While the majority of examples of ludonarrative dissonance are unintentional, there are
 examples of where ludonarrative dissonance has been used in the alienation or
 verfremdungseffekt to achieve certain things in games. Intentional use of ludonarrative
 dissonance, such as in Spec Ops: The Line (Yager Development 2012), which breaks the fourth
 wall to talk to the player and to reference their actions in the game, demonstrates the use of
 the verfremdungseffekt in which an "artist never acts as if there were a fourth wall besides
 the three surrounding him (Wikipedia 2016c).
 In Spec Ops: The Line (Yager Development 2012) the players character is part of a special ops
 team sent into Dubai to kill a person similar to Heart of Darkness (Conrad 1902) or Apocalypse
 Now (Coppola 1979). The player is told constantly that they are a terrible person, and it is
 pointed out that this is an incredibly unrealistic situation and what the player is doing is
 completely immoral. The player can no longer have the illusion of being the unseen spectator
 at an event which is really taking place"(Wikipedia 2016c). The game purposely draws
 attention to its artificiality. This is done to break the players suspension of disbelief and make
 them pay greater attention to the themes and content rather than the story or actions being
 played out.
 Alienation and Ethical Frameworks
 When a player is alienated their ethics are no longer constructed by the rules of the game. If
 the game, for example, told the player to murder a bunch of children and they will be
 rewarded in a certain way, a lot of players would do that because there are no actual
 consequences to killing things in a game. The rules of the game allow this unethical behaviour
 until the immersion is broken.
 Metal Gear Solid 2: Sons of Liberty (Konami Computer Entertainment Japan 2001) is a good
 game to describe how alienation affects ethics. The plot involves a terrorist organization
 which has taken over a military facility. The player is told to stop them which is an exact retread of the first game Metal Gear Solid (Konami Computer Entertainment Japan 1998). The
 player discovers throughout the game that the entire game is set up by an elite organisation
 or cabal, known as the Patriots, who are an illuminati-style organisation who have been
 controlling the US government from behind the scenes for the past half century.
 The setup was intentional and the entire terrorist take over was also done intentionally by
 the Patriots to see if they could reproduce the exact same effect on the protagonist Raiden
 that it had on the previous protagonist Solid Snake. Raiden then discovers his past and finds
 out that this entire thing was a test to see if he would do what Solid Snake would not do,
 which was kill the president of the United States who is Solid Snakes brother. The end game
 is very strange as it starts intentionally glitching out and the characters start saying
 nonsensical things such as, I need scissor 61 and instead of Mission Failed it says Fission
 Mailed (Konami Computer Entertainment Japan 2001). The game is breaking the fourth wall
 by telling the player to stop playing the game because it is malfunctioning. Metal Gear Solid
 2 (Konami Computer Entertainment Japan 2001) is an ethics test set by the director Hideo
 Kojima to see if the player has changed their ethics over the course of a couple of years.
 In this project, to enable the product to alienate test players, the game design should be based
 on theatre sets and the way the theatre stage is presented in a Brecht play as mentioned in
 section 2.4. The staging and how everything was set out in a Brecht play was very important
 for the audience to realise and think about what was going on in the play. Naturally if the
 same idea is recreated in a game, it should make the player think about the ethical dilemmas
 of the characters and help them understand and relate to the characters as people rather
 than sprites. It should make the player think about why these actions were done by the
 characters and if they would do them themselves in that situation. Alienating the player from
 the game would bring them back into reality where the player can reference their own ethical
 and moral framework and apply it to the game.
 3 Possible Solutions
 In order to investigate the players ethical awareness, a standalone product to test the
 hypothesis is required. This can be achieved in a variety of ways as discussed below.
 3.1 Possible Product Solutions
 There are several approaches the product could take to investigate alienation and ethical
 frameworks in games. For example, it would be possible to make a VR style game if the tools
 were available. The VR game could be a game similar to Stanley Parable (Galactic Cafe 2013),
 but in the first person perspective where the player is playing as themselves. This means that
 there is no disconnect between the player character and the player.
 A basic choice game in Unity (Unity Technologies 2015) using 3D models could be a viable
 option. However, this could be affected by art style, aesthetic or dialogue. The UI (user
 interface) would also be much more important than in a 2D game.
 Another possible solution is a 2D top down RPG similar to those developed for 8bit or 16 bit
 consoles. This could be used because it is easy to make. It also has the added benefit of having
 a setup similar to a stage. This would permit the development of a game in the style of a
 Brecht theatre play so the player can be alienated.
 A maze-type game such as Hand of Fate (Defiant Development 2015) could be developed,
 which uses virtual cards to tell a persons journey through a world and how they deal with
 ethical choices along the way.
 Another possible approach could be to go in the opposite direction with a very mechanically
 organised game. All the decisions would be made through completing tasks. For example, this
 could be a shooting gallery type of game where you need to shoot people to progress. An
 example of a moral dilemma in such a game could be that you have to shoot a civilian in order
 to get to another target in the game and there is no way to avoid it. Do you win the game by
 committing an immoral action, or do you lose the game because of your ethics? This approach
 would probably require a 3D game using an engine such as Unity (Unity Technologies 2015).
 Another approach could be to create a game with a very Art House aesthetic and have a
 minimal amount of mechanics in the game and no discernible story line. This could be done
 in a basic sense through using character moods to set the palette of the game and this in turn
 could be used to inform character interactions. The narrative would be summed up in text
 boxes with an epilogue. This would be hard to achieve and perhaps not very effective. This
 approach would also be hard to code, but could be done if time was not an issue.
 A narrative RPG was chosen as it can easily convey moral dilemmas and allows for easy
 distinction of choice. This is because clear character perspectives and obvious goals are
 presented.
 3.2 Game Development Software
 The product is a basic game using RPG Maker (ENTERBRAIN INCORPORATED 2015). This
 inherently restricts the game as RPG Maker can only make top-down RPG style games in the
 style of Japanese role-playing games (JRPGs), such as Final Fantasy VI (Square Enix (formerly
 SquareSoft) 1994), Dragon Quest (Square Enix (formerly SquareSoft) 1986) or Harvest Moon
 (Amccus 1996).
 The game is an interactive installation done in the style of 16bit JRPGs. The player walks
 around and interacts with non-player characters. Unlike the JPRG this game does not have an
 over world map interlinking scenes and the player is forced to progress through the decision
 tree.
 The reason RPG Maker was chosen is because of its ease of scripting and quickness to change
 the product. It is easier to make a game than when using Unity (Unity Technologies 2015) for
 example, and does not require the learning of scripting languages such as Python and C++.
 RPG Maker only requires some Java scripts for more complicated tasks and options.
 By using RPG Maker less time is spent developing the coding sections and more time can be
 spent in the design and art sections of the game. The newest version of RPG Maker, MV,
 released in October 2015 has been chosen specifically for cross platform development
 abilities. It also has a wider variety of pre-made assets. This version also has character
 portraits that assist the differentiation between characters during dialogue.
 Constraints of RGP Maker
 RPG Maker does not allow that much freedom as all areas have to be in 2D rooms which have
 a specific pixel width. All art assets have fixed dimensions which limits creativity. RPG Maker
 MV is sprite based. The sprites are a bitmap of an actor with a script behind it so that when
 you interact with the sprite in the game, a dialogue box appears with a character portrait.
 RPG Maker Controls
 The game requires controls to move around and interact with the actors. The actors engage
 in dialogue with the player which is pre-programmed into RPG Maker. The controls are simple
 to understand on a mechanical level so the player should instantly understand what to do in
 the game without needing guidance.
  = move up
  = move left
  = move down
  = move right
 [SPACEBAR ] or [ENTER] = interact (with either object or characters)
 4 Product Requirements and Justification
 4.1 General Requirements
 In order to investigate if players understand the repercussions of their actions in games, the
 product should force the player to make decisions based on their own moral code. The
 choices should progress during the game to reflect previous decisions. The product should be
 able to distinguish whether a player brings their own moral code to the game or if they play
 to win. The product should be entertaining and engage the player. If the game involves
 problem solving or is not entertaining the player may feel like they are taking a test rather
 than playing a game. This is critical as the project specifically investigates the players
 realisation of ethics in computer games. From these requirements Specification 1 and
 Specification 2 in Appendix 13.3 are developed.
 4.2 Moral Choice Requirements
 To test the players realisation of ethics they should be given choices throughout the game
 which involve moral dilemmas. The question is whether a player applies their own ethical
 framework to play ethically when the game environment presents moral dilemmas. As
 learned in section 2.1.1, to ensure that the players choice is based solely on their own ethics,
 the game must not incentivise the player. As discussed in section 2.3 the choices in the
 product should be narrative and not mechanical choices as this will allow the player to bring
 their own ethical framework to the game and not encourage them to follow a predetermined
 path. This requirement supports Specification 3 in Appendix 13.3.
 In order to test if the player uses his or her own ethical code, the player should be provided
 with just enough information to predict the possible implications of their actions. As learned
 in section 2.2, presenting moral dilemmas requires decisions that are not straightforward or
 clear cut. However, in order to analyse the choice data after play testing the dilemmas should
 not be too complex. This can be achieved by implementing an opaque ethical framework for
 binary or three choice options as discussed in sections 2.1.2.1 and 2.3. From these
 requirements Specification 5 has been developed requesting an opaque ethical framework.
 The choices should be limited to three options in order to avoid complicating the choice, as
 more than three choices risks being too vague.
 4.3 Player Alienation Requirements
 As discussed in section 2.4 the product should ensure the player is alienated prior to making
 any decisions so that the decision making process is from their own standpoint. To achieve
 this the product should intentionally alienate the player using aesthetic alienation which
 includes narrative and art design. This method of alienation is proposed over system
 alienation as it will be much easier achieve. Hence the game should not have complex systems
 or mechanics to ensure that alienation is purely narrative and aesthetic. This requirement
 supports Specification 4 in Appendix 13.3.
 Before each choice, the player should be alienated by certain aspects of the narrative and art
 design of the game so that they can make decisions from their own ethical standpoint rather
 than that of their character. The player can be alienated in a number of ways including; the
 type of choice given, conflicts between narrative and art design and by drawing attention to
 the players position in reality.
 Specification 6 requires that the first choice is a binary choice, as in Figure 4-1. This is required
 in the narrative in order to alienate the player. Binary choices alienate the player because
 they are uncommon in reality. If this binary choice is not connected to a karma system that
 explains why there are only extreme options available, the binary choice will not make sense
 outside of the gaming environment. This would draw attention to the fact that the player is
 playing a game and thus they become alienated.
 Choice
 Path A
 Path B
 Figure 4-1: Binary choice
 Specification 6 also states that the first choice should force the player to decide between
 pragmatic and ethical options. The ethical choice should impede the mission due to the loss
 of skillsets and knowledge. The pragmatic choice should assist the mission. Consequences of
 the first choice could be very drastic and dramatic which could be made to conflict with the
 art design if a cutesy or animesque aesthetic was used. The player would therefore continue
 to be alienated from the game as the art design and narrative at this point do not mesh.
 In the second level a second choice should be presented. As the player has not been able to
 re-immerse themselves in the game they may continue to apply their own ethical framework
 to the game. Specification 7 requires three options for the second choice. This specification
 ensures that the game has sufficient variables to allow the player to enjoy the game a number
 of times which controls the designers attempts to satisfy Specification 9.
 The final choice in the game may be used to alienate the player further by offering a choice
 that encourages them to reflect on their own position in reality. If the final choice involved
 self-sacrifice it could cause the player to contemplate their position as a player controlling a
 character, rather than looking at the narrative from the characters perspective. Specification
 8 thus requires that the final choice includes the option for self-sacrifice. At this point the
 player is not immersed in the game and can consider the ethical repercussions of their actions
 from their own moral standpoint.
 4.4 Aesthetic Requirements
 As reviewed in section 2.2.2.4 the aesthetic for the product should provide a neutral tone,
 with basic character design as per Specification 12 to minimise any influence from the
 designer or game aesthetic on the players moral choices. Furthermore, the product should
 not try to obtain photorealism as stated in Specification 13 as this risks undoing the
 intentional alienation as discussed in section 2.4.2.
 4.5 Narrative Requirements
 Specification 14 states that the narrative tone of the product should be neutral. This is to
 prevent any bias on the players ethical standpoint. For example, a dark tone would make the
 player feel hopeless and reduce their feeling of agency, potentially leading to arbitrary
 decisions regardless of their morality. Similarly, a light-hearted narrative tone should be
 avoided to help ensure decisions are made seriously.
 4.6 World Building Requirements
 Specification 15 requires that in order to avoid historical inaccuracies and preconceived biases
 that may affect the players choices, the product should be set in a constructed world and not
 against a historical backdrop as noted in section 2.2.1.
 4.7 Game Mechanics Requirements
 As per section 2.1.2 it is critical that the player does not simply play to win. In order to not
 spontaneously or instantaneously involve the player a computer based role-playing game
 without mechanics such as battle systems is suggested. To help ensure that the player
 controls do not distract from the ethical choices the product should limit the mechanics to
 character movement and character interaction as per Specification 4. This also permits play
 testers from a range of backgrounds and computer gaming experience.
 4.8 Time Requirements
 Play time is an important feature of the system requirements as the players should be able to
 play the game twice and fill out the questionnaire in a reasonable time period. Really good
 testing, expanding to one hour of game play, should probably have 3 levels of choices with
 branching paths. The testing of this product should last 20 minutes as this is enough time to
 get a good amount of information from the tester and also have enough time to get through
 quite a few different testers. Nine branches over three choices is taken as the requirement as
 this would fit into the allocated 20 minutes as per Specification 16.
 In order to assist the designer in meeting these time requirements, Specification 10 states
 that the introduction is expected to enable the player to start the game in medius res.
 Furthermore, the time constraints may be met by having the epilogue quickly present the
 player with the consequences of their actions, Specification 11.
 The entire product specifications may be found in the Appendix 13.3.
 5 Design of the Game
 5.1 Game Flow
 The game flow is prescribed based on the players choice. Each choice leads to a different
 branch in the decision tree. When the player interacts with a specific character there is a
 choice to be made at the end of their conversation. Once the player has made that choice
 they progress through the game. The route through the game is driven by the choices made
 by the player. The player is informed about these choices by non-player character dialogue.
 The NPC dialogue conflicts each other to leave the player in a neutral standpoint, whilst
 informing the player as much as possible about the choice at hand. The dialogue should make
 the player understand the characters viewpoint, but not change the moral standpoint of the
 player. The player should empathise with the character but should not think like the
 character.
 Figure 5-1: Choice chart
 Game Introduction
 The games introduction tells of a small set of characters going into a generally unknown
 environment to deal with the consequences of the unknown and to try and complete their
 mission. It is used as a backdrop to give the player an understanding of the plot. This first set
 is fixed, the player has no control and it is set to automatically run when the games starts.
 Figure 5-2: Introduction
 Scene Progression
 In scene 1 the player is given a binary choice. This means that the next set branches into two
 separate scenes which are different. This can be a different location, there may be more items
 on the ground or the scene dressing is different. This was done to make the effect of the
 players choice more immediate and to show the importance of their choices.
 In the second stage the player will have a three choice option which takes them to the third
 stage. From the third stage the player makes a choice that takes them to a final level which
 has six variations of an epilogue. The epilogue script gives a conclusion based on the choices
 made, except for the last choice which is a redundant choice.
 In between each scene, intermission text boxes appear to explain to the player what has
 happened between making the last choice and entering the next scene. It gives greater
 context for choices, helping the player understand the consequences of their actions.
 5.2 Characters
 The players character is the leader of an expedition. He is tasked with finding an Orb of
 magical power. He is young and impressionable, yet comprehends the merits of being
 pragmatic and peaceful.
 There are four NPCs in the game. Three of which are very active and give advice throughout
 the game, Corri, Alaric and Hector. These three main characters were based on the Freudian
 idea of id, ego and super-ego which a lot of characters in fiction are based on as it allows a
 somewhat predefined character interaction. It is a common trope in fiction such as in the film
 Forbidden Planet (Wilcox 1956). The fourth NPC, the Old Guy, only appears in the first scene.
 Corri
 Corri is a supporting NPC and is the personification of Freuds id. He provides local information
 because he has travelled on a previous expedition to the area. He is competent in the skills of
 navigation and can sail a ship. He is an all-round very competent person and is pragmatic.
 Corris character is intended to portray a Social Darwinist through his tough appearance and
 the general attitude behind his dialogue. Corri was made to be an example of the Great
 White Hunter and imposes a sort of imperialist standpoint over the locals.
 Alaric
 Alaric is a supporting NPC and represents Freuds concept of the ego. He is in theory the
 second in command and generally gives neutral advice. Alaric has a strong military
 background and focuses on his duty and getting the job done. Alaric is happy to engage in
 conflict if he views it as necessary but would rather take the more peaceful option if available
 and appears to be as effective.
 Hector
 Hector is the team doctor, representing the superego. Hector is the most idealistic of the
 group and strives to achieve the goal with the minimal amount of bloodshed. Hector also has
 a strong sense of justice and will support views that go with his moral code, which is lawfulgood. Namely he wants to do good things in a just and lawful manner. He does not believe
 that anyone is above the law.
 Old Guy
 The Old Guy is there to accuse Corri of crimes and act as a witness. He wishes that Corri is
 punished for his crimes.
 5.3 Ethical Choice Development
 The intent of the game is to get the player to make ethical decisions based on their own moral
 code. The choices and supporting information have undergone much consideration in order
 to force the player to be introspective. The choices progress during the game and reflect the
 types of decisions made for the previous choices.
 First Choice
 The first choice is designed to get the player to decide between completing the mission
 effectively or upholding justice. To achieve this the player is asked to decide between keeping
 or removing the NPC Corri, who might be useful to the player due to his expertise but has a
 questionable past. Punishing the character and removing him from the game would be bad
 for the mission due to the loss of navigational skills and geographical knowledge. If he stayed
 in the game he would be working for the players character and assisting the mission. To
 punish and remove the NPC or to allow the NPC to stay provides the source of moral
 contention and depends on the ethical standpoint of the player.
 The options for the first choice are:
 Option 1: Letting the character be lynch mobbed by a bunch of locals for an unspecified crime
 that he committed in the past. This is purposely made to be a horrible method of removing
 the character. This is taken as the moral option.
 Option 2: Protecting the character and escaping the scene so that you may exploit the NPCs
 skill set in the game. This is taken as the pragmatic option.
 Option 3: There is a third option which gives the player time to quit the dialogue and think
 about the choice and gain further information from other characters. To progress to the next
 level the player must make a choice between option one or two. Having a binary choice such
 as this is unrealistic and would alienate the player, bringing them out of the experience and
 make them think more like themselves. It is purposely designed to alienate the player and
 make them think differently about their actions in the game. This is because humans in
 general like having a third option instead of having two (Sicart 2010).
 Second Choice
 In the second choice, after the player has decided whether or not to get rid of Corri and the
 events have unfolded because of this choice, the player will then find themselves in one of
 two very different situations. The point of this is to show the impact the player choice has,
 thus increasing their importance to the story. It increases their feeling of agency which is what
 makes a player feel useful and makes their choices meaningful (Extra Credits 2013).
 5.3.2.1 Path A
 In the second choice on path A as per Figure 5-4, the player must negotiate with a tribe that
 is not visible to the player. The remaining characters have discovered where they can locate
 the McGuffin style object. There are three possible options for getting to it; attacking the
 tribe, negotiating with them or sneaking past them using the underpass, which is possibly
 filled with dangerous monsters, assuming the player understands fantasy tropes and
 colloquialisms of fantasy. Once the player has made this choice they will move on to the final
 choice of that path which does not affect the epilogue, except for choice 2a which does affect
 the epilogue.
 Figure 5-4: Second choice in scene 2 on path A
 5.3.2.2 Path B
 On path B, where the players are still on their ship because it hasnt run aground, they know
 where the Orb is and how to get to it, but they dont know how they are going to get past a
 Nanten` fleet that is in the way. The player has to make a decision call on how they are going
 to deal with this fleet and get past it and they are given several options.
 Figure 5-5: Second choice in scene 2 on path B
 The first choice is having a diversion group attack an outpost or a town before retreating.
 While the Nanten fleet is going after them, the main expedition group go through and up into
 the mountains to get the object.
 The second choice is the most fantasy option which is contacting an outside spirit for help,
 which is similar to fantasy tropes such as in the Heros Journey story pattern where you are
 contacting the father and the mother (TV Tropes 2016b).
 The third choice is sneaking past them because there is a time when the Nanten fleet is not
 in the area so the expedition group can sneak past them. However, the problem with that
 choice is that it might cause damage to the ship as there must be a reason why they dont go
 at this time.
 Third Choice
 The third choice is unaffected by the second choice, however the second choice does affect
 which NPCs are in the location and how they interact with the players character. It also
 affects where this choice takes place. It is an irrelevant choice it has absolutely no effect on
 the epilogue. An irrelevant choice was chosen here as it meant the development would be
 easier and there was a limit to the amount of epilogues that had to be written. Also it is
 interesting because there is a complete inversion of what had previously been done in choice
 one and two, where the players choice and importance was the main factor.
 Epilogue
 The golden choice or golden ending generally refers to the best ending where everything is
 good for everyone. There is no golden ending or golden epilogue in the product. This is a
 deliberate choice to help make the players understand the ethical repercussions of their
 actions. Also the immediate or correct choice was not obvious. As the effects of choices dont
 always become apparent until sometime later, the epilogue was used to compress the time
 scale and make the player see the full repercussions of their actions which can sometimes
 cross an entire life span. The point of the epilogue is to try and make the player understand
 the full scope of their actions, the cause and chain of effects, also referred to as the butterfly
 effect (Wikipedia 2016b). This is designed to make the player understand the consequences
 of all their actions and make them realise what happens to the characters after the player no
 longer has control over the characters. For example, in choice 3aii, the player negotiated with
 the Bronze Tribes which means they have no money and no food and they are trapped in a
 location they know nothing about. This means they are stuck in this area and never leave
 because they can never find a way out. The epilogue is the amalgamation of decisions and
 allows the player to understand the repercussions of their actions by giving them a very broad
 scope of what happens after the player has finished the game and their actions therein.
 In most games good and bad are always defined; the good choice where everyone is happy
 and good things happen to people and the bad choice where the job gets done, but everyone
 is miserable. In the game, because there is an opaque ethical framework, there is no good
 and bad because most of the choices are not really defined that way. They are defined more
 in terms of what is best for the player. Even the binary choice has underlying tones of
 uncertainty, is the person accusing Corri honest and telling the truth?
 5.4 Questionnaire Design
 A questionnaire is required to evaluate the player choices and tactics. This is critical to
 understanding the morals and ethical standpoints of the players. It is also required to
 understand if they change their play strategies between play throughs. The original
 questionnaire (Questionnaire Rev1) and completed answers can be found on the DVD in
 Appendix 13.8. This original questionnaire showed a lack of questions that captured player
 feelings in a form that would be easy to analyse. The first responses to this first questionnaire
 were too subjective and proved difficult to convert into statistical form.
 The final questionnaire that was issued for play testing can be found in Appendix 13.5. It
 involves multiple choices, but does not restrict the player from selecting Other or more than
 one option. It is designed to be quickly analysed and discover statistical trends if present.
 5.5 Implementation
 At the start of the game all control switches and variables are set to zero. This is good practice
 to ensure the baseline of all variables are initialised at zero. There is also the time of common
 event which counts every sixty frames (one second) and adds one integer number onto that
 variable. Also it means there is a counter automatically in the game after the start game
 switch is turned on.
 Figure 5-6: Common event timer variable
 The introduction was created by making a map scene and using a parallax background with
 scrolling text. At this point the players character is invisible. This was also how the epilogue
 scene and the post-test scene for data collection were done as well.
 Figure 5-7: Introduction scene with scrolling text
 In each scene or level of the game the player can interact with the NPCs present in that scene.
 These interactions provide the player with information, however interaction is optional. Each
 NPC in each scene will have its own variable where, once the player has finished talking to
 them, one point is added on to that variable. NPCs were moved during the first scene and
 scene 2b using the base scripting in the game. This was to identify to the player that these
 characters were entering the dialog.
 The choice variable works by, every time the player chooses, "let me think about this", which
 means you can delay making a choice, 10 is added on to each choice variable.
 Figure 5-8: Control variable: Allow me to think about
 this option
 When the player makes a decision and automatically goes to the next scene, either 1, 2, 3 or
 4 is added in that one location. For example, in the first choice if they say "let me think about
 this" two times, but then they choose route A, it will come up as 21. It works this way because
 multiples of one or two are not possible, only multiples of 10 are possible.
 Figure 5-9: Assigning a variable to a choice script.
 The only exception to the choice variable was Hector in scene 2b in which in an optional
 dialogue you can chat to him and either agree or disagree with his request. Since there is no
 finite way for the character to stop giving the player this choice, the variables became a bit
 strange. For example, if you agree with Hector it's always 10 added to that variable, but if you
 disagree 1 is added. So technically, if the player disagrees 10 times the results are the same
 as if the player agreed with him once, which is a minor problem.
 Figure 5-10: Agree/Disagree with Hector script variable
 In the scenes containing the Orb in the last section of the game, the Tablet holding the Orb
 was set to auto run the script warning the player. This was done as it made more logical sense
 in the context of the game for the players character to instantly interact with the object when
 nearing it.
 The intermission scenes worked by using the fade out script, adding text and then changing
 the players location to the designated scene and fading in. This was used to give a sense of
 time and distance between the scenes. The epilogue was coded with a nested "if" statement
 so everything was in sync with previous decisions, but there was a variable for each path the
 player chose. If the player chose a certain path they would get a certain epilogue because a
 switch would happen which would turn on that specific epilogue. The only reason that the
 counting wasnt included in the nested "if" statement was because the last choice in the game
 was designed to be irrelevant. It is up to the player's interpretation whether or not their
 character died if they chose to sacrifice themselves by volunteering to take the Orb.
 If : 3aiend is ON
 Epilogue 1 Scrolling Text
 Else
 If : 3aiiend is ON
 Epilogue 2 Scrolling
 Text
 Else
 If : 3aiiiend is ON
 Epilogue 3 Scrolling
 Text
 Else
 If : 3biend is ON
 Epilogue 4 Scrolling
 Text
 Else
 If : 3biiend is ON
 Epilogue 5 Scrolling
 Text
 Else
 If : 3biiiend is ON
 Epilogue 6 Scrolling
 Text
 End
 Figure 5-11: Nested if statement for epilogues.
 At the end of the nested "if" statement there is variable 19 which stops the timer of the game.
 This was included here so that the timer on the results page shows what the time was at the
 beginning of the epilogue, instead of what the time was at the nested "if" statement. That
 means there is a clear obvious result at the end of the epilogue of how long it took the player
 to reach the epilogue.
 Figure 5-12: Timer control script
 In the page which comes after the text congratulating the player for playing the game and
 telling them they should seek the researcher, there is an "if" statement waiting for the "page
 up" key. When that is pressed it will jump out of the if statement to a label "reshow". The
 if statement will run in a continuous loop until "page up" is pressed. However, this came
 with a problem as Macs were mostly used during the testing phase where the player had to
 press "Fn" and "up", which some test subjects did not understand.
 Figure 5-13: Wait for admin script at end of results
 After the label reshow a background script then comes up that calls all the variables
 throughout the game, which includes the choices the player made and their interactions with
 other characters. Having the variables shown on screen allowed the data to be collected much
 quicker and more easily than using external tools. Embedding it in the game made it quicker
 to get the data and show it more clearly to the researcher.
 Figure 5-14: Result display code for end of game data collection
 At the end of the results there is an option to jump back to the beginning of the variables in
 case the researcher missed anything. There is also an option for the player to end the game.
 Figure 5-15: Reshow data script
 5.6 Quality Assurance Testing
 Quality Assurance (QA) testing for the product was minimal in some regards due to the basic
 nature of RPG Maker MV which uses basic scripting language and Java if desired. The errors
 expected were spelling errors in the dialogue or basic syntax errors in the code that would
 cause specific problems in the game. Other errors were expected due to the engine used. It
 was expected that if a button was pressed too rapidly, characters may disappear or there
 would be glitches on screen. In general, superficial errors were mostly expected rather than
 fundamental errors in the programming.
 Test Plan
 The overall structure for testing was from a top-down perspective. The game did not need a
 compile time check as the game was very basic. QA testing set out to answer questions such
 as:
 1) Is this game fit for purpose?
 2) Is this good enough quality?
 It was not necessary to determine if the game functioned at a basic level due to the effective
 UI of RPG Maker. The game was expected to function perfectly each time due to the basic
 scripting language and low complexity of RPG Maker.
 Different test phases were carried out over a period of several days with different subjects in
 different locations. Testing was carried out in alpha, beta and gold states.
 Alpha Testing
 Alpha testing commenced when the game was content completed. Alpha testing involved
 using subjects to test the game, these were not play test subjects as they were not included
 in the play testing results.
 The designer played the game following each choice path to test the location coding. During
 alpha testing of the game it was discovered that certain choices did not take the player to the
 intended location. This was because there was a problem in the script, which was then altered
 to enable it to work. The game was also tested by pressing command keys repeatedly and
 skipping through dialogue quickly to see what would happen and then fixing any consequent
 issues that were observed.
 During alpha testing several issues were discovered, namely that it was not possible to
 efficiently find out which choices the player made in the game. The results of character
 interactions were also hard to extract. In later phases variables were added and embedded in
 the game which meant that choices and interactions could be easily identified. Timing the test
 was also an issue, a stopwatch had to be used for each test subject and it was not possible to
 time each individual decision within the game. QA testing also included dialogue alterations,
 spelling corrections and punctuation changes.
 Beta Testing
 Beta testing involved using close friends and family to test the game with the new
 questionnaire and automated results script. In beta testing more spelling errors were
 discovered. Also the play time was found to be difficult to record and a timer was added into
 the game so that a stopwatch was no longer needed. This meant timing was more efficient
 and testing became more coherent. However, it did mean that seconds had to be divided by
 60 to get the minutes, which was a nuisance.
 Gold Game Release
 Gold game release was the release used for play testing. There were several things that were
 not accounted for that were noticed at this stage such as choice 3biii which had the wrong
 epilogue. Also a few more spelling errors were discovered.
 6 Play Testing
 Play testing took place in a few different locations. The first location was the Kings Buildings
 student union bar at the University of Edinburgh. John Leslies Pub in Edinburgh was the
 second location, where an older age group was available for testing. The Golf Tavern,
 Edinburgh was the third location where the majority of play testers were tested. This group
 was of the lower end of the age spectrum. The final location was the Baillie Gifford offices in
 Edinburgh.
 The locations used in play testing were chosen to ensure that test subjects were of widely
 different demographics of age, sex, profession and whether or not they played lots of
 computer games. These details about play testers were recorded to try to understand if
 certain demographics followed similar paths during the game, for example if regular gamers
 were more pragmatic than non-gamers.
 Potential test subjects were asked if they would like to take part in game testing and if
 interested they were then given a brief description of what was required before being asked
 to fill out a consent form. Test subjects were encouraged to play test the game by being
 offered refreshments. This was to give people an incentive to test the game. Testing the game,
 plus filling out the questionnaire took an average of 20 minutes per test subject. This allowed
 a lot of testing to be done quickly which meant more players could be tested.
 Test subjects played the game twice and then filled out a questionnaire with questions about
 which choices they picked in the game and how they made those choices in each play through
 of the game. Discussions to explore players choices were not carried out due to time
 constraints and it would not be possible to analyse these responses statistically. A
 questionnaire was used so that data could be gathered quickly and analysed effectively.
 General observations were noted by the researcher and are discussed in the results section,
 however these are very subjective comments and not useful for extrapolating data. Feedback
 and comments from test players were also recorded and discussed below, however these
 comments mostly relate to the game design.
 Test subjects had varied views on the product. The general response was quite positive,
 however there were a few problems. Some players did not understand the controls and
 needed to be instructed during testing. Some test subjects did not understand that the Orb
 Tablet was an interactive object and thought it was part of the set. These test players could
 not find a way of ending the game until told how by the researcher. Several test subjects got
 lost in other scenes and did not understand how to progress in the game such as in the first
 scene and during both A and B path in the final scene. This shows poor design or obtuseness
 of design as it was not always clear to players what they were supposed to do. Also there was
 no tutorial to explain the games commands.
 7 Results
 The results are presented below, the raw results in tabular form can be found on the DVD in
 appendix 13.8.
 7.1 Demographic Distributions
 A total of 40 players were approached for testing, of these 36 testers had valid results for the
 analysis. The most frequently tested age group was 22 to 30 years, then followed by 17 to 21,
 30 to 50 and finally 50+. The age group distribution is given below
 NUmber of Testers
 50+
 Age Group
 Figure 7-1: Age distribution of testers
 testers there was only one that did not give this information, the reason for which is unknown.
 Female
 Male
 Not
 Given
 Table 2: Gender distribution of testers
 One third of the testers were regular gamers. It could be argued that people who play
 regularly were affected ethically by previous games that had extrinsic rewards as a moral
 framework.
 No
 Yes
 (blank)
 Table 3: Distribution of regular game players
 7.2 Questionnaire Results
 Did you talk to all of the characters before making your choices?
 In response to Question 1, 64% answered Yes to talking to all of the characters, 19% Tried
 to talk to all of the characters whilst 17% said No.
 YES
 NO
 TRIED TO
 Table 4: Question 1 results
 If you answered Yes or I tried to to question 1, why did you or try to talk to all of the
 characters before making your decision?
 79% of the testers said their main reason for talking to all of the characters was because they
 wanted to hear what everyone had to say before making the choice. It is likely that they may
 have wanted more information about what was the correct choice. One person did think
 the dialogue was interesting. 17% of the testers only talked to all the characters because they
 believed it was the objective of the game and was required to move onto the next stage.
 a) I wanted to hear what everyone had to say before making a choice
 b) I thought the dialogue was interesting
 c) I thought that was what I was supposed to do
 Other:
 Table 5: Question 2 results
 If you answered No to question 1, why did you not talk to all of the characters before making
 your decision?
 Of the people that said No to question 1, three people were confused by the obtuseness of
 the game and didnt realise they could talk to other characters before making a choice. Two
 people said that they had already made their minds up before speaking to everyone. No one
 said the dialogue was boring and one person responded other, saying they spent too long
 there on the first run and hence hurried through the second run.
 a) I had already made up my mind before speaking to everyone
 b) The dialogue was boring
 choice
 Other:
 Table 6: Question 3 results
 Would you have liked more information during play about the consequences of each option
 before you made a choice?
 66% of people thought there needed to be more information about the consequences of the
 choices and the dialogue should have provided more explanation and understanding for the
 player. However, 33% did not feel the need for more information. The general 66% to 33%
 split within the play testers gives evidence that the opaque ethical framework was achieved.
 YES
 NO
 Table 7: Question 4 results
 If you answered yes to question 4, please state why.
 Seven people thought they would feel more immersed in the game if they had more
 information. Twelve people thought it was a fun aspect of the game that you have the
 possibility of knowing the consequences before choosing. Six people went for other, mostly
 due to curiosity. But there wasnt a very defining other thing.
 a) It would make me feel more immersed in the game.
 b) I would have been nicer to other characters and focussed less on the
 objective.
 c) It is a fun aspect of games that you have the possibility of knowing the
 consequences before choosing.
 Other:
 Table 8: Question 5 results
 If you answered no to question 4, please state why.
 a) I dont take my choices that seriously, it is just a game.
 b) Knowing the consequences would have made me be nicer to other
 characters and focus less on the objective which is important.
 c) It is more like real life to find out the consequences after making a choice.
 Other:
 Table 9: Question 6 results
 The majority of people who said No, which was seven testers, said it is more realistic in the
 game to find out the consequences by making the choice and then finding out afterwards
 which is similar to other games.
 Did you return to characters to see if they had more information regarding the choices?
 The majority, 23 testers, said No, while 13 testers said Yes. This does not inform us if the
 play testers talked to the characters multiple times.
 NO
 YES
 Table 10: Question 7 results
 Did you face any moral dilemmas in making the choices?
 In question 8, 78% of play testers said they did face moral dilemmas, while only 22% did not.
 No
 YES
 Table 11: Question 8 results
 What was the primary way you made your choices: was it moral, practical or state
 otherwise?
 Testers were asked this question for both plays.
 Q9a: First Play through
 Q9b: Second Play through
 Number of Testers
 MORAL
 PRACT
 BOTH
 OTHER
 Figure 7-2: Question 9: Results of game play
 technique for first and second play through
 7.2.9.1 Q9a: First Play Through
 During the first play though 50% of the players tried to play morally, either through their own
 ethics or the ethics of the game. 39% tried to play practically or win the game. This was also
 noted by many players asking, How do you win? 13% mentioned either both or other
 leading to no distinct conclusions.
 7.2.9.2 Q9b: Second Play Through
 In the second play through the number of practical players increased from 39% to 50%, whilst
 moral players dropped from 50% to 42%. There was one Other and two Both moral and
 practical players.
 Did you feel your choices had an impact on the outcomes for the characters?
 32 play testers thought the outcomes had an impact on the characters, where 4 players did
 not. It is not known why these 4 play testers did not think their choices had an impact on
 the characters.
 No
 YES
 Table 12: Question 10 results
 Did you feel that the choices you were offered were realistic ones in the context of the
 game?
 94% of play testers thought the choices were realistic within the game world and the setting.
 However, 6% did not. It is unknown why the 6% thought the choices were unrealistic or
 illogical for the setting. Possible explanations of this could be that they thought contacting a
 spirit for help was impractical or silly or that having a weird constructed world setting was
 impractical for having a moral choice in it.
 NO
 YES
 Table 13: Question 11 results
 If you did not agree with the objectives of the expedition and you were given the choice to stay
 at home, would you have?
 This question could have been worded better. This is similar to choices in games such as Far
 Cry IV (Ubisoft Montral 2014) where you can end the game before the game actually leaves
 by not doing anything. 47% said no to the question, whereas 27% said yes. So 27% would have
 ended the game early if they had the chance. This also might have connections to imperialist
 theory and the moral standards of today compared to the moral standards of the 17 th century,
 for example.
 YES
 NO
 NA
 Table 14: Question 12 results
 Would you like to play again to see what other outcomes might be?
 66% of play testers wanted to play the game again. 33% did not want to play the game
 again.
 No
 YES
 Table 15: Question 13 results
 During the first play-through did you play from a strategic perspective with the goal to win
 the game, or did you apply your own ethics in order to do the right thing?
 In the first play through 39% of play testers played with their own ethical framework and 53%
 tried to strategically play the game.
 Q14: First Play Through
 Q16: Second Play Through
 Number of Testers
 ETHICS
 STRAT
 BOTH
 OTHER (CURIOUS)
 Figure 7-3: Q 14 and Q16 results
 After the first outcome did your perception of the game objectives change?
 The majority of play testers thought that their perception of the game changed and therefore
 they tried to play the game differently after their first play through, which shows the
 opaqueness of the framework.
 NO
 YES
 Table 16: Question 15 results
 During the second play-through did you play from a new strategic perspective with the goal
 to win the game, or did you apply you own ethics in order to do the right thing?
 In the second play through it was a 50/50 split between players using their own ethical
 framework and strategically playing the game with each at 42% of the test group. 14% played
 the game from a curious point of view. One tester chose both strategic and ethical play.
 Do you think the game would have been more enjoyable if immoral actions were rewarded?
 There was a pretty much 50/50 even split for question 17 of play testers who thought they
 should be rewarded for their actions with roughly 53% saying yes but 47% saying no. This
 shows that some players did want to be rewarded for their actions in general rather than
 having no rewards besides heres an epilogue, meaning that they wanted the game to give
 them at least a hint of how the game wanted them to act morally and ethically and how they
 should play the game.
 NO
 YES
 Table 17: Question 17 results
 Were you happy with the outcome of the game after you played it?
 For the final question of the questionnaire, thirty play testers said Yes, five said No, they
 were not happy with the outcome they got, probably because they got a terrible ending. One
 said both which probably means they found the first ending they got was good and the second
 one was bad or the other way round.
 BOTH
 NO
 YES
 Table 18: Question 18 results
 7.3 Game Flow Results
 Play Time
 Generally, the majority of play testers were much faster in the second play through. On
 average the second play through was 60% faster than the first play through, see Figure 7-4.
 First Play-through
 Second play-through
 NUmber of Testers
 Play Time [minutes]
 Figure 7-4: Play time analysis
 The play through time analysis graph shows that mode play time for the first play through
 was eight minutes. The longest time was 21 minutes which was for subject one, with four
 testers only taking six minutes on their first play through.
 In the second play through the highest amount of play testers completed the game in five
 minutes. These results show that play testers were much faster in their second play through.
 There could be a number of reasons for this such as they skipped the first scene of dialogue
 because that is not a scene that changes, so they had heard all of the dialogue before. Some
 people were also not talking to all of the characters in the second play through. Some people
 were most likely not familiar with computer games and were getting used to the controls and
 how to control the game in the first play through.
 First Play Through
 The first choice options, 1 and 2, are taken as the moral and pragmatic choices respectively.
 In the first play through people morally and pragmatically were quite split. The majority were
 strategic with 21 play testers choosing option 2 while 15 play testers chose option 1. This is
 different from the second play through where everything was more evenly split.
 Q9a
 MORAL PRACT
 Grand
 Total
 BOTH
 OTHER
 Grand
 Total
 Table 19: First choice comparison with Q9a
 Q14
 ETHICS
 Grand
 Total
 STRAT
 BOTH
 CURIOUS Grand
 Total
 This generally shows that people at least changed their play style in the second play through
 and understood the repercussions of their actions that the first play through had.
 Player
 Seize Him
 [18]
 Attack
 [3]
 PC
 [2]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Hector
 [1]
 Do Not Harm this Man
 [21]
 Negotiate
 [8]
 PC
 [3]
 Alaric
 [3]
 Sneak Past
 [7]
 Hector
 [2]
 PC
 [6]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Use Decoy
 [11]
 Hector
 [1]
 PC
 [7]
 Corri
 [3]
 Contact Spirit
 [4]
 Hector
 [1]
 PC
 [2]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Corri
 [2]
 Sneak Past
 [6]
 PC
 [4]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Hector
 [1]
 Corri
 [1]
 Figure 7-5: First play through flow chart
 In the first play through the majority of players went for options 2,1,1, which is the second
 choice then using a decoy and then sacrificing yourself in the last choice. The second most
 popular choice path was 1,3,1, which was sneaking past your opponent after sacrificing Corri
 and then finally sacrificing yourself for the Orb. Several path options were not taken at all
 such as options 1,1,2, and 1,3,2, also 2,2,2, and 2,3,2. These were generally the options where
 you sacrificed Alaric, who players seemed to like as a character.
 In the second play through the most popular choice path was 1,2,1, which was to punish Corri,
 negotiate with the tribes in the mountains and then sacrifice yourself. There was a much more
 even spread with very few path options having no people, the only exceptions being 1,1,2,
 and 2,3,2, which are also the ones where the player sacrifices Alaric instead of themselves.
 There may have been a more even spread due to more people wanting to experience what
 different options were and perhaps players were fed up of certain characters such as Hector
 or Corri.
 In the first play through option 2,3,1, which is saving Corri, sneaking past and then sacrificing
 yourself was a mixture of pretty much everyone including strategic, moral, practical and
 ethical players. Option 2,1,1, was purely people who played strategically and practically, but
 option 1,3,1, was a mixture of people who played morally and strategically.
 Distributions of Choice Path and Moral/Practical and Ethical/Strategic Questions for First Play Through
 Choice
 Path
 Grand
 Total
 MORAL
 PRACT
 MORAL
 ETHICS STRAT CURIOUS Total ETHICS STRAT CURIOUS
 Table 21: Choice path vs. Q9a and Q14
 PRACT
 Total
 BOTH
 OTHER
 Grand
 Total
 Second Play Through
 The data for the choice paths is better seen in the second play through. Option 1,2,1 was the
 most popular option with the majority of players being ethical with some practical people.
 This shows that todays society generally considers this the most morally right choice path to
 take in the game. The other two main choice paths were 3aiiiA, which was again a mixture of
 people playing strategically and morally, ethically and practically and option 2,2,3, which
 again was a mix. All other paths had one player mostly.
 Player
 Seize Him
 [20]
 Attack
 [3]
 PC
 [2]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Hector
 [1]
 Do Not Harm this Man
 [16]
 Negotiate
 [11]
 PC
 [9]
 Alaric
 [1]
 Sneak Past
 [6]
 Hector
 [1]
 PC
 [4]
 Alaric
 [1]
 Use Decoy
 [5]
 Hector
 [1]
 PC
 [3]
 Corri
 [1]
 Contact Spirit
 [7]
 Hector
 [1]
 PC
 [1]
 Alaric
 [1]
 Corri
 [5]
 Sneak Past
 [4]
 PC
 [2]
 Alaric
 [0]
 Hector
 [1]
 Corri
 [1]
 Figure 7-6: Second play through flow chart
 We can conclude that after the first play through people played by their own ethical
 standpoint more and thus their ethical viewpoint of the game changed with that or at least
 how they could win the game.
 Row Labels
 BOTH
 Grand Total
 MORAL PRACT OTHER
 Grand
 Total
 Table 22: Comparison of first choice and Question 9b
 Row Labels
 Grand Total
 BOTH
 CURIOUS ETHICS STRAT
 Grand
 Total
 Distributions of Choice Path and Moral/Practical and Ethical/Strategic Questions for Second Play Through
 Choice
 Path
 Grand
 Total
 MORAL
 PRACT
 MORAL
 ETHICS STRAT CURIOUS Total ETHICS STRAT CURIOUS
 PRACT
 Total
 Table 24: Choice path comparison with Q9b and Q16
 OTHER
 BOTH
 Grand
 Total
 7.4 General Observations
 General observations made during play testing is a subjective way of recording the testing
 outcomes, however it is a useful way of recording the general response to the product. Some
 people were confused by the obtuseness of the design and didnt understand how to
 complete the game because they werent explained and there was no tutorial in the game.
 Several people commented on spelling mistakes and other small errors such as having the
 wrong epilogue for one of the choices. Depending on who they were with, some play testers
 were quite silent and just made all the choices and filled out the questionnaire. Some people
 were confused even if they were surrounded by friends, namely the first group in the Golf
 Tavern who didnt really understand what was going on in the game. There was also a group
 of four university students who were having fun and joking around. So the atmosphere was
 very dependent on the group and if they were playing next to someone else. Other people
 who were trying to get really involved in the play testing were asking lots of questions during
 the testing, while others just played the game and filled out the questionnaire.
 8 Evaluation of Results
 8.1 Conflicting Results
 The results show a disagreement between what some players did in the game and what they
 said they did in the questionnaire. Whether they were deliberately concealing the truth is
 unknown. 39% of people who answered yes to question one did not actually talk to all of the
 characters in their first play through, despite claiming that they did. In the second play
 through however, 87% of people did not actually talk to all of the characters even though they
 said they did. As the dialogue in the first scene does not change, players may have been trying
 to speed through the scene to get to other options later in the game.
 8.2 Opaque Ethical Framework
 One third of the play testers who answered that they wanted more information to understand
 the consequences of their actions during play said yes, they did try to talk to all of the
 characters before making a choice. For the people who said they did not want more
 information about making the choice, over half of them returned to characters before making
 a choice, which is interesting. One possible reason for this could be that these players wanted
 to see if the character dialogue was different.
 Of the 24 people who wanted more information before making choices, 20 said yes to
 question 8, meaning they were trying to get more information to understand the moral
 choices they had to make and see if there was an obvious morally right and wrong answer.
 Interestingly, half of the people who said they did not need more information also said they
 did face moral dilemmas. This shows that most people did face moral dilemmas and because
 the majority of these wanted more information to make their decision, it shows the opaque
 nature of the ethics in the game; choices were not obvious or clear cut.
 The majority of testers, 94%, thought that the dilemmas presented were realistic in the
 context of the game. This means that the choices were not simple, but morally ambiguous to
 a certain extent. They were somewhat realistic and made logical sense for the characters.
 With little information regarding the consequences and no clear right answer, the play
 testers are being forced to put their own morals in to the game.
 8.3 Moral Dilemmas
 78% of the player base said they did face moral dilemmas while they were making their
 choices, thus they were trying to think morally. They were trying to do what they thought was
 correct and they were conflicted with the choices they were given. In question 6, four people
 decided to say I dont take my choices that seriously, it is just a game, which shows that
 those play testers did not take a morally serious standpoint to the game and would not have
 faced moral dilemmas. This is evidence against the theory that players bring their own ethical
 framework to the game.
 It is thought that those that did not take the choices seriously possibly could not get past the
 artificiality of the game. Perhaps with more world building and more character information in
 the game players would feel more immersed and thus take their choices more seriously.
 8.4 Moral Versus Ethical and Practical Versus Strategic
 It was expected that testers who were moral would also be ethical. Similarly, those who were
 practical would also be strategic. It is interesting that for those who answered moral to
 questions 9a and 9b, some then answered strategic for questions 14 and 16. Again the
 opposite is of interest, for those that answered practical to questions 9a and 9b, some then
 for questions 14 and 16 played from their own ethics. These Moral/Practical and
 Ethical/Strategic choices are given below in Figure 8-1 with the associated choice paths
 A,B,C,D as moral-ethical, moral-strategic, practical-ethical and practical-strategic
 respectively.
 A
 MORAL
 ETHICS
 C
 B
 D
 PRACTICAL
 STRATEGIC
 Figure 8-1: Flow chart of game strategy and moral standpoint
 Moral people who followed their own ethics are described by path A. Whereas moral testers
 who played strategically follow path B. Practical people who used their own ethics are
 described by path C and finally, practical players who played strategically are described by
 path D.
 ETHICS
 MORAL
 PRACT
 BOTH
 OTHER
 Grand Total
 STRAT
 BOTH
 CURIOUS Grand
 Total
 Table 25: Comparison of Questions 9a & 14 answers
 In the first play through, 13 play testers went for path A; they tried to play morally and to use
 their own ethics. Five people went for path B, which is to play morally but also strategically,
 perhaps trying to win the game. One play tester played practically but also by their own ethics.
 Twelve of the people who played practically also tried to play strategically. This means that
 the majority of play testers generally followed the paths of moral-ethical and practicalstrategic with some in between. This confirms that moral and ethical views are well matched,
 and similarly, practical and strategic views are also well matched.
 In the second play through it is still quite an even split with twelve play testers playing morally
 and ethically (Path A) and thirteen play testers playing practically and strategically (Path D).
 ETHICS
 STRAT
 BOTH
 MORAL
 PRACT
 BOTH
 CURIOUS Grand
 Total
 OTHER
 Grand Total
 Table 26: Comparison of Question 9b & 16 answers
 However, there is a higher number of people who were playing practically using their own
 ethics, with only one play tester playing morally but also strategically or in a sense trying to
 win the game.
 8.5 Changing Tactics
 Using pivot tables, the results were analysed showing that 22% of testers who played morally
 at first stayed moral in the second play through. However, 72% of the people who were moral
 in the first play through played practically in the second play through, whereas 6% went to
 both. On the practical side 64% changed to moral and 29% stayed practical. This shows that
 play testers tried to experience more of the game in their second play through by making
 choices which they did not make in their first play through.
 In the first play through, more people played morally and then switched to practical, thus
 showing that in the first play through the majority of players wanted to play more morally
 than practical.
 2nd Play Q:9b
 1st Play Q:9a
 MORAL
 MORAL
 PRACT
 BOTH
 OTHER
 Grand Total
 PRACT BOTH OTHER
 Grand
 Total
 Table 27: Comparison of Q9a and 9b tactics
 After collecting all the results and analysing them, the results show that in some cases people
 may in fact bring their own morals to the game. Age, gender and the amount of video games
 a person plays does not affect the results very much and whether or not a player understands
 the repercussions of their actions is determined on a personal basis rather than by a trend.
 Results show that people generally switched their play style after the first play through. This
 might not be due to the realisation of ethics through game play, it could just be because these
 players want to explore more content in the game. However, the results of the questionnaire
 cannot identify what is the real reason here.
 2nd Play Through
 ETHICS
 STRAT
 BOTH
 ETHICS
 STRAT
 BOTH
 CURIOUS
 Grand
 Total
 CURIOUS
 Grand
 Total
 Table 28: Comparison of Question 14 & 16 tactics
 From the choice path data collected from the game, it could be argued that in the first play
 through people tried to play strategically with the most popular choice path being to keep
 Corri in the first scene and then in the second choice using Alaric as a decoy. This is the most
 practical choice path and the easiest to understand. In the second play through, once play
 testers had seen the consequences to their first play through, the most popular choice was to
 negotiate and then sacrifice themselves. It can be argued that this shows that fewer people
 tried to become more pragmatic and instead more people tried to become more moral and
 use the ethics of today to try and win the game; namely that negotiation and diplomacy is
 always the best course of action. This shows that most people switched to a more moral
 handling of the game after they had understood their actions.
 Whichever way players switched, the fact that players changed their play style may indicate
 their realisation of ethics in the game. Either they switched because they wanted to play more
 ethically and this was the right thing to do, or they switched because they wanted to play less
 ethically to experience more content. It should be noted that players may have been under
 the assumption that the game wanted them to play a certain way in order to win and thus
 they changed their play style accordingly. Although many people did not want to be rewarded
 for immoral actions, this was only by a small margin so could be negligible. However, it could
 be argued that some players, especially those who play a lot of games, tried to play from a
 particular ethical standpoint in order to receive rewards and win the game as this is quite
 standard in many computer games.
 9 Evaluation
 9.1 Product Evaluation
 It can be argued that the game was successful in making the play testers understand the
 consequences of moral choices and their actions in the game as many people did change their
 actions for the second play through. The strengths of the product made include its
 conciseness, moral ambiguity and opaque ethical framework thus making it a useful tool to
 test players understanding of morals. It is also an interesting piece of narrative fiction with a
 provocative dialogue.
 In hindsight the method of QA testing was flawed as it was not conducted in a methodical
 way, it was instead carried out when problems were noticed. There were also a few bugs that
 went unnoticed during QA testing. Play testing of the game was effective, but could have been
 done better with more casual observation of participants and perhaps a one to one interview
 with testers if time allowed. This would help understand why players chose certain options.
 The product was played through very quickly, so did not meet the original criteria of
 20minutes. However, this meant that more players were able to be tested in the time
 allocated for play testing. The game is playable at least twice with each path being vastly
 different from the next. Even if the same decision is made in the first choice, a player can still
 vary their path later in the game. This changes the consequences and arrives at a different
 epilogue in the game which keeps the play testers engaged and increases their feeling of
 agency. If the game was played through more than twice, the player base may have got fed
 up or they would eventually realise that the final choice in the game has no impact on the
 epilogues and they would possibly be a bit confused by this. In short, more play throughs
 would allow the cracks in the product to show and the player may become more focussed on
 the game design rather than the choices.
 The introduction for the game allowed the game to begin in medius res, but could have been
 improved. Regarding the epilogue, many play testers did comment on how the epilogue
 showed the consequences of their actions in the game so therefore it met the product
 requirement, but some thought that the endings were a bit disappointing. The lack of new
 dialogue when a player approached a character repeatedly did not help to give the player
 clues about the consequences of their actions. In hindsight, it also seems a bit nonsensical for
 characters to continually repeat the same dialogue while a big event was unfolding.
 The game was successful in having a neutral tone as it wasnt overly cynical or overly idealistic.
 Although a very subjective observation, it appeared that some play testers were engaged with
 the product and wanted to play again, while others did not want to play again. It was very
 dependent on the individual and perhaps whether or not they were interested in interactive
 fiction. Some play testers may have been more interested if a different genre was used.
 If further tests were carried out, certain improvements to the game could be made. For
 example, instead of having the intermission text the game could have shown the characters
 moving to the next location on screen or showing the consequences of the players actions in
 game play. This may have been a more efficient way of making the player aware of their
 actions as the player would experience the consequences rather than just reading about
 them. However, this would require lots more production time. Also although there were very
 few mechanics in the game and it was very basic, many people were confused about what to
 do and how to control the game, particularly people who had not played computer games
 before. This issue would need to be addressed if further tests were carried out.
 RPG Maker (ENTERBRAIN INCORPORATED 2015) was the most appropriate tool to use for this
 type of game as it could easily make a narrative fiction setting and no time was lost in coding
 set canvases. It provided an efficient way to make a product which was not designed to be
 complicated. The product did not require a large amount of scripting or coding, the most
 complicated parts being the nested if statement and the NPC movements.
 The product could have been made using Unity (Unity Technologies 2015) for example with a
 3D model and using a maze based walking simulator style game in a vein similar to Stanley
 Parable (Galactic Cafe 2013). The choices in this case would have been mechanical choices
 rather than by engaging in dialogue. This may have made the game more interesting to people
 who hadnt played games before. It would have also been interesting to voice certain
 characters which may have helped people understand what was going on, but this would
 depend on voice quality and the sound quality of the product. One area of concern is that the
 art design of the product tested could inherently alienate players and cause them to take
 decisions less seriously. It would be interesting to see how the game affects the players ethics
 if a version was made with a photorealistic aesthetic using complex 3D models.
 Overall the results of the product specification evaluation were very good, having met mostly
 all of the specification criteria. The full results of the product specification evaluation can be
 found in Appendix 13.7.
 9.2 Evaluation of Project
 In the first semester the project schedule was poorly managed due to focussing on other
 projects and poor time management. The second semester picked up as the dissertation was
 the main focus and the impeding deadline provided useful motivation. The main thing learned
 throughout the project was the importance of efficient time management and effective
 spacing of other commitments. Note taking was also very important and it was learned that
 there are other effective ways of recording data aside form handwritten notes, such as using
 a Dictaphone which became instrumental in recording ideas for the project. If the project was
 repeated it would be started earlier with the analysis section being completed by November.
 More use could have been made of literature software such as Mendeley and the literature
 review should have taken a more critical stance. It would also have been useful to revise
 product tutorials more often, particularly with regard to the product pipeline.
 More time was spent in the writing section of the project than specified in the project plan,
 however less time was spent on making the product than originally set out in the plan. In
 hindsight more time should have been spent on finding appropriate sources and the writing
 should have been started at an earlier date. The study of the verfremdungseffekt or the
 alienation effect was particularly interesting when studied in a gaming context as the player
 starts off in an alienated position as they are part of the game, not as themselves, but as a
 character within the game. It was also interesting to investigate ethics within games and note
 how games mostly use mechanics to influence how the player plays the game. Some of the
 reading covered seemed a little misinformed and did not take into account many of the things
 that effect games. A lot of the reading was also quite dated, mostly coming from the 90s.
 Computer games and violence was quite a popular issue during this time and so the reading
 was talking about ethics mainly from that point of view.
 There were no legal issues related to the product or project. It could be argued that there
 were ethical implications in making test players deal with difficult consequences due to their
 actions and playing the game had a small potential for causing emotional distress. However,
 as the players actions were carried out in a virtual environment and the subject matter was
 fairly light-hearted, the risk of this was very unlikely and there was no evidence of such issues
 during play testing.
 Making the product was interesting, despite a few annoyances such as the limitations of RPG
 Maker. The making of the game encouraged creative thinking both on the technical side and
 in terms of narrative, however it could have been more closely related to the ideas discussed
 in the literature review. Character interactions were a new aspect to learn, but creating the
 dialogue for the characters was a challenge as RPG Maker deletes lines of text if the four-line
 limit is exceeded. The product was fairly successful in answering the essay question as it did
 make players understand the moral issues of the game through the narrative. It allowed the
 player to view the games ethics through different perspectives during each play through if
 they chose to. It could be argued that it didnt really achieve its goal through play as there
 was not a lot of gameplay in the product.
 10 Conclusions
 To conclude, the product did meet the aims and requirements of the project with some
 efficiency. The project required a test plan to investigate the players understanding of their
 actions in computer games. The literature reviewed identified opaque ethical frameworks as
 a good source for moral contention. From this, a short RPG was designed that gave players
 choices and tracked their movements. A questionnaire was developed that enabled the
 statistical analysis of the players choices and compared them to their moral standpoints. The
 results indicate that people alter their view based on the consequences of their actions when
 given another chance to play.
 The product requirements may have been better met with a longer game which covered more
 ground. The questionnaire results conclude that after the first play through the majority of
 people changed their play style which may indicate the realisation of ethics through the play
 and narrative of the game. Game flow data concludes that in the second play through, the
 most popular choice path was the one which included making the morally correct decisions.
 This shows that the majority of players played more from a moral standpoint in the second
 play through and thus their ethical viewpoint of the game changed, or at least their view on
 how they could win the game changed.
 The approach to the question was methodical and well thought out in parts, however some
 areas of the project could have been improved as connections were made that were not
 always there. More reading may have helped in this respect, especially a closer reading of
 Sicart (2011). Also wider reading concerned with ethics in other media may have been helpful.
 Adding combat and extension scenes would have made the game more interactive and more
 enjoyable. Additional minor NPCs that illustrated the effects of player choices on those
 around them may have had more impact in presenting the consequences of each choice.
 Better custom artwork could have improved the games aesthetic and presented a more
 neutral tone with respect to modern society. In order to improve the game, the levels could
 have had more variation to illustrate the difference in setting and choice options. There is one
 epilogue that is not called properly and this could be fixed. The characters repeat their
 dialogue which could be improved with pseudo-random speech that gives the player more
 agency as the dialogue is more like actual people.
 The questionnaire was useful to understand the demographic of the testers. Tracking their
 ethical standpoints showed strong correlation between ethical and moral as well as strategic
 and practical views as was expected. The questionnaire would have benefitted from more
 questions about ethics. The opportunity for the testers to give their opinion of characters
 would have improved the understanding of the results and would have allowed a better
 understanding of the success of the character portrayal as it was intended.
 The project achieved an answer to its question as the majority of people changed their moral
 standpoint between play throughs. It was also learned that key identifying factors such as
 age, gender and computer game experience do not affect the players understanding of the
 ethical repercussions of their actions. The project highlights that narrative is very useful in
 determining how players choose certain options. The project also showed that opaque ethical
 frameworks do not confuse the player if used to set up moral dilemmas. Evidence also
 suggests that complex mechanics are not required to test whether players understand the
 consequences of their actions.
 10.1 Further Work
 Further work related to this project could include a study of other effective ways of either
 alienating or further engaging a player using the systems or mechanics of the game. It would
 also be interesting to create a test to see if and how morals effect player agency.
 The study of VR games would be an interesting way to extend this project, especially with
 regard to the verfremdungseffekt or alienation effect because the purpose of VR technology
 is to immerse the player completely in the game world. It would be interesting to test peoples
 reactions to moral situations in a VR game when the reality of the game is so close to our own.
 This project although perhaps not useful to society in a broad sense, may be useful to game
 design and how to achieve certain aspects of game design better. If a game designer
 understands how they can affect the player on a moral and ethical level, then they can more
 easily design certain aspects of games to make the player feel specific things while playing. It
 can help the game designer use the medium of computer games to its best ability.
 